README.md, before:

# Ansible Env Setup

```sh
    MVladislav
```

---

- [Ansible Env Setup](#ansible-env-setup)
  - [clone](#clone)
  - [install](#install)
  - [setup](#setup)
    - [device](#device)
    - [ssh-key](#ssh-key)
  - [run](#run)
    - [setup a client](#setup-a-client)
    - [setup a server](#setup-a-server)

---

## clone

```sh
$git clone --recursive https://github.com/MVladislav/ansible-env-setup.git
```

## install

```sh
$sudo apt install python3 python3-pip sshpass
: 'optional: openssh-sftp-server'
$sudo pip3 install ansible
```

## setup

### device

copy `inventory/inventory-example.yml` to `inventory/inventory.yml`</br>
`$cp inventory/inventory-example.yml inventory/inventory.yml`

add the device informations into: `inventory/inventory.yml`

from default the base setup is defined in each file:

- `playbooks/playbook-client.yml`
- `playbooks/playbook-server.yml`

if needed you can update this, like you need to install services.

### ssh-key

copy `playbooks/vars/default-example.yml` to `playbooks/vars/default.yml`</br>
`$cp playbooks/vars/default-example.yml playbooks/vars/default.yml`

every setup will add a **ssh-key** to the **nodes**, for that</br>
you need to add a **ssh-pub-key** into `playbooks/vars/default.yml`</br>
where the **key**, in the file, will be selected by: `"{{ ansible_user }}-{{ ansible_host }}"`.

this will be done in: `playbooks/tasks/pre-tasks.yml`

## run

### setup a client

on first run:

> `-k` => will use **ssh with a password**, as a fresh setup has no **ssh-key**

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-client.yml --ask-become-pass -k
```

on other runs:

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-client.yml --ask-become-pass
```

### setup a server

on first run:

> `-k` => will use **ssh with a password**, as a fresh setup has no **ssh-key**

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-server.yml --ask-become-pass -k
```

on other runs:

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-server.yml --ask-become-pass
```

Commit message:

refactor: update readme + add image for how client looks after playbook run + time how long playbook runs + some extra comments

README.md, after:

# Ansible Env Setup

```sh
    MVladislav
```

---

- [Ansible Env Setup](#ansible-env-setup)
  - [clone](#clone)
  - [install](#install)
  - [setup](#setup)
    - [device](#device)
    - [ssh-key](#ssh-key)
  - [run](#run)
    - [setup a client](#setup-a-client)
    - [setup a server](#setup-a-server)

---

![client](__docs/client_ubuntu_2104.png)

**client installer runs around `1h`**

## clone

clone this repo recursive, because the roles are</br>
included as submoduls

```sh
$git clone --recursive https://github.com/MVladislav/ansible-env-setup.git
```

## install

install ansible on host to run the playbook

```sh
$sudo apt install python3 python3-pip sshpass
: 'optional: openssh-sftp-server'
$sudo pip3 install ansible
```

## setup

### device

copy `inventory/inventory-example.yml` to `inventory/inventory.yml`</br>
`$cp inventory/inventory-example.yml inventory/inventory.yml`

add the device informations into: `inventory/inventory.yml`

from default the base setup is defined in each file:

- `playbooks/playbook-client.yml`
- `playbooks/playbook-server.yml`

if needed you can update this, like you need to install services.

### ssh-key

copy `playbooks/vars/default-example.yml` to `playbooks/vars/default.yml`</br>
`$cp playbooks/vars/default-example.yml playbooks/vars/default.yml`

every setup will add a **ssh-key** to the **nodes**, for that</br>
you need to add a **ssh-pub-key** into `playbooks/vars/default.yml`</br>
where the **key**, in the file, will be selected by: `"{{ ansible_user }}-{{ ansible_host }}"`.

this will be done in: `playbooks/tasks/pre-tasks.yml`

## run

### setup a client

on first run:

> `-k` => will use **ssh with a password**, as a fresh setup has no **ssh-key**

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-client.yml --ask-become-pass -k
```

on other runs:

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-client.yml --ask-become-pass
```

### setup a server

on first run:

> `-k` => will use **ssh with a password**, as a fresh setup has no **ssh-key**

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-server.yml --ask-become-pass -k
```

on other runs:

```sh
$ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-server.yml --ask-become-pass
```
